Tonight,
on The Secret Life of the Brain
"The Baby's Brain."
How does the brain grow
to become the most complex
thing in the universe?
And what if something
goes wrong?
( baby squealing )
WOMAN:
She weighed three pounds
and she was 14 inches long.
WOMAN 2:
They survive
and make the best of it.
Yet, what's the cost?
Tonight, the brain's
delicate first months.
[Captioning sponsored
by WNET]
Major funding for
The Secret Life of the Brain
is provided by
the National Science Foundation
America's investment
in the future.
Funding is also provided by...
At Pfizer, we're spending
nearly $5 billion
looking for the cures
of the future.
We have 12,000 scientists
and health experts
who firmly believe the only
thing incurable is our passion.
The Medtronic Foundation,
on behalf of Medtronic.
Providing lifelong solutions
for people with chronic disease.
The Park Foundation--
dedicated to education
and quality television.
The Corporation
for Public Broadcasting
and by contributions
to your PBS station from:
NARRATOR:
The brain is wider than the sky,
for put them side by side,
The one the other will contain
with ease, and you beside.
( grunts )
( murmurs )
The brain is deeper
than the sea,
For hold them, blue to blue,
The one the other will absorb,
as sponges, buckets do.
The brain is just
the weight of God,
For heft them, pound for pound,
And they will differ,
if they do,
As syllable from sound.
A baby's brain--
less than one pound
of gelatinous tissue
and within its milky,
convoluted folds,
a universe of meaning.
Emotions, ideas,
memories, dreams--
all will somehow
find a home here
evolving and changing
over a lifetime.
MAN:
The ultimate machine
and the ultimate source
of everything.
We understand the world
the way we do
because of the brains we have.
We will understand the brain
itself the way we will
because of the brains we have.
NARRATOR:
The brain is the most complex
thing on Earth.
Even the brain of a baby
is wildly complicated.
WOMAN:
A piece of a brain the size
of a grain of rice
contains about
10,000 nerve cells
just in that little piece.
And you can just imagine
how many pieces
you have in your head.
Within that 10,000 nerve cells,
each nerve cell can make
anywhere between one
to 10,000 connections
with other nerve cells.
So there are something like
a trillion connections.
WOMAN:
It's almost overwhelming
to think about the whole thing.
If you think about
how the whole brain
and nervous system
gets assembled
you know, you just want
to throw up your hands
and say, "It's way
too complicated.
We're never going
to understand it."
The brain is the seat of our
consciousness, of who we are
and in understanding
where it comes from
we understand
where we come from.
( babies gurgling and cooing )
( monitor beeping regularly )
NARRATOR:
Elizabeth Traphagen was born
less than two weeks ago
three months
before she was expected;
three months before she was
ready to meet the world.
( Elizabeth squeals )
WOMAN:
She was 28 weeks and six days;
she weighed three pounds
and she was 14 inches long.
It was somewhat frightening
not knowing what a premie
would look like.
( whispering ):
There we go.
WOMAN:
It's something you don't expect.
You're suddenly
in this medical world
rather than the world
of taking your baby home
and trying to figure out how to
dress it and change its diaper.
( monitor beeping regularly )
NARRATOR:
Elizabeth is a healthy
premature baby--
her lungs actively
suck in the air;
her heart beats on its own.
But the one organ central
to all the others
is not fully prepared--
her brain.
The miracle technologies
of modern medicine
can help keep Elizabeth alive
but 12 critical weeks
of brain development
must now continue outside the
protective walls of the womb.
WOMAN:
When the baby comes out of
the womb, everything changes--
suddenly light,
suddenly sharp sounds.
The brain reacts
to the stimulation.
It can't filter, it can't stop,
it can't shut it out.
They survive
and make the best of it.
Yet what's the cost?
NARRATOR:
The brain of a baby born three
months premature is vulnerable.
Many precious weeks
of development still remain.
Billions of brain cells
are not done forging links
with billions
of other brain cells.
Eventually, there will be
trillions and trillions
of connections between cells
charged with electrical pulses
rippling like lightning storms
across the hills and valleys
of the brain's
deeply furrowed tissue.
Every cell in its place,
every link between cells
carefully organized--
nothing random,
nothing arbitrary.
WOMAN:
What we would really love
to understand
is how the brain,
during development,
generates millions and millions
of neurons,
sends them to the right position
in the brain,
and then somehow instructs each
of those individual nerve cells
to form very, very specific
connections with one another.
You can think about development
like a play--
a play that follows a script
that is written down
by the genetic code
but it has no director,
it has no producer
and it has a bunch of actors
that have never spoken
their lines before.
Despite all this,
you pull the play off.
To me, that's a miracle.
NARRATOR:
Egg and sperm-- their union
forms a single cell
which will divide, and divide,
and divide again.
Within three weeks,
the multiplying cells
have curled into
a quivering oval ball.
Inside lies a cluster of cells
that have begun
to fold themselves
into the shape of a garden hose,
the neural tube.
From the bottom will come
the spinal cord;
from the top, the brain.
Here lies
the primitive beginning
of all our thoughts
and feelings.
By four weeks, just as a woman
is discovering she is pregnant
the first brain cells,
the neurons,
are already forming
at an astonishing rate--
500,000 neurons every minute--
neurons that will never
reproduce themselves
and rarely be replaced.
McCONNELL:
And that's amazing,
because if you think about it
most cells in your body
turn over.
If you think about your skin,
you're constantly...
it's sort of disgusting--
you're constantly sloughing off
dead skin cells.
And someone calculated once
that if you look at the turnover
of skin across a lifetime
you're probably generating
and shedding
about 90 pounds of skin.
So, most cells in the body
do their thing
and then they die,
and they're replaced.
Neurons are born in fetal life
and then those very cells
are the ones
that are still functioning
all the way into old age.
NARRATOR:
As the tiny fetus grows
the neurons make their way out
from inside the neural tube
to build the brain, layer
upon layer, like an onion.
The neurons follow
a cellular pathway
as if they were traveling
down a highway.
They just grab hold of
supporting cells called "glia"
and propel themselves along.
WOMAN:
They put their nucleus
in the back of the cell
which makes them sort of fat
in the back
and then they hold on to the
guide wire, this glial fiber.
So, it's kind of like an
inchworm as it moves along.
And each little cell
goes all by itself
in what is a very,
very vulnerable process.
No other kind of cell
has to do that
and it's just an amazing thing.
NARRATOR:
Neurons travel in waves--
millions every day embarking
on a daunting expedition
that scientists call migration.
WOMAN:
It's an amazing phenomenon
because it's as if they are
going across the country.
I mean, in terms of the
distances relative to their size
they're... they're making
a huge odyssey
through all kinds
of foreign territory.
And the most amazing thing
about this migration
is that they generally do it
without mistakes.
They're following cues
along the way
that are telling them
exactly where to go.
NARRATOR:
For years, scientists wondered
how the migrating neurons
find their place in the brain.
Do the neurons simply travel
in herds
gliding down a glial highway
which takes them
to their final destination?
Or do neurons
do their own driving,
each neuron
genetically programmed
to fulfill its own
predetermined purpose?
McCONNELL:
We used to think that migration
was just like delivering cells
out a conveyor belt
and we just dump out the cells
at the end.
But now we know
that's not the case.
There is evidence that shows
that young neurons
have an idea about
where they're migrating to
and that they can recognize
their position within the brain.
NARRATOR:
In her laboratory
at Stanford University
neurobiologist Susan McConnell
devised a series of experiments
to track the destiny
of a migrating neuron.
Neurons are born from
the division of stem cells
the seeds from which
the tissues of the body grow.
Some stem cells
can transform themselves
into any kind of cell--
blood, skin, heart, bone...
or brain cell.
McConnell took a descendant
of a stem cell
and before it morphed
into a neuron
transplanted it
into a developing brain;
then, watched it migrate.
She found that the fate
of the soon-to-become neuron
was determined by the neurons
that were its neighbors.
It traveled beside them and took
on the same function they did.
McCONNELL:
That cell is plastic;
it's still listening to signals
from the outside.
It gets the instructions
from the new neighbors
and it resets its fate.
It says, "Yeah, sure,
I can do that, too."
NARRATOR:
But when McConnell
transplanted a neuron
it was true to
its own genetic destiny--
it followed its own path
and took on an entirely
different function
from the cells surrounding it.
McCONNELL:
What this result tells us
is that by the time a young
neuron begins its migration
it has already
received instructions
about what to become;
it knows.
It goes into a new environment
and even though everyone else
in the brain...
All these other young neurons
are going to position A
it says, "No, no, I'm supposed
to go to position B"
and that's exactly what it does.
( fetus's heart beating )
NARRATOR:
By 24 weeks, the vital organs
of the fetus are well formed;
the primitive heart
can beat on its own,
the once powerless lungs
are now prepared
to fill with air
and the brain has
nearly its full compliment
of billions and billions
of neurons
reaching out to each other,
building connections
with mind-boggling speed,
nearly two million
every second,
until the brain has become
a tightly packed network
of trillions
of crisscrossing wires
with more connections
than stars in the sky.
SHATZ:
You can imagine the size
of the wiring problem.
So, how's that problem solved?
How is that achieved
during development?
How is that each one of those
trillion connections
is made appropriately?
You might think,
"Oh, what a mess.
It's just going to be a jumble
of connections and wires
all over the place."
But in fact, the nervous system
seems to have a strategy.
NARRATOR:
The strategy is in the genes.
The brain begins to wire itself
by following a precisely
specified genetic blueprint.
SHATZ:
The connections are following
very defined rules.
You know, "Go out of the eye,
turn right at the optic chiasm,
cross the chiasm, head toward
the lateral geniculate nucleus,
grow into
the lateral geniculate nucleus.
Don't grow into the medial
geniculate nucleus
because that's
an auditory structure.
So you can imagine the first
stage of brain wiring
is kind of like solving
the problem
of connecting phones in New York
to phones in Boston;
making sure that
you're making connections
between Boston and New York and
not Boston and Washington, D.C.
And that's all specified
genetically.
Now then, there's a second phase
of brain wiring.
Let's say you want
to place a phone call
to your grandmother in New York,
and you want that phone to ring,
you know, on Park Avenue
and 47th, or wherever,
and you don't want the phone to
ring up at the Waldorf Astoria.
Okay, how do you get
that precise phone to ring?
That's the second phase
of brain wiring.
If you place a phone call
to your grandmother
early in development...
Her phone will ring...
But so will
a lot of other phones.
So there are a lot of
connections that are made.
If the connections are correct
and being used,
they get strengthened.
If they're not being used
or if they're only being used
occasionally, they're lost.
We could call it
"use it or lose it."
So the fetal brain is really
a dynamic structure
that's constantly changing
in response to this process
of strengthening
appropriate connections
and pruning
inappropriate connections.
Getting the circuits
all tuned up takes a long time
so it can't happen overnight
because you have literally
billions of connections
to check.
( fetus's heart beating )
When a child
is born prematurely,
the process is only partly over.
So a huge amount of brain wiring
is having to happen
in the nursery.
( monitor beeping )
NARRATOR:
At Brigham and Women's Hospital
in Boston,
two-week-old Elizabeth Traphagen
born three months premature,
must cope with the world
before her brain is ready.
For more than two decades,
developmental psychologist
Heidelise Als
has been studying premies
like Elizabeth
to learn
how their fragile brains,
accustomed to the muffled
darkness of the womb,
adapt to the dazzle and buzz
of the world.
ALS:
How does the difference
of inputs,
of sound, of light, shape,
how the brain grows itself?
All those cells haven't yet laid
down their connective tissue,
their telephone wires,
if you will.
But it's much more active
than that.
It's like a wire
that grows itself.
So, it's dynamic,
it's biological.
It's not like the hardware in
your computer that you put in,
but it depends
on what it's experiencing
on the way it grows.
( monitors beeping
as staff converse )
NARRATOR:
Thanks to
the technological wonders
of the modern
intensive care unit,
most premature babies survive.
( beeping and conversing
continuing )
But nearly half will have
difficulties later in life,
difficulty paying attention,
difficulty learning.
ALS:
They will have trouble
with planning,
imposing structure,
prioritizing.
As they grow up
they appear as very bright
children, and they are,
yet they can't hold their own
in the second-grade classroom.
( beeping and conversing
continuing )
NARRATOR:
Als and her research team
believe
that the glare and clamor of
the intensive care unit itself
is part of the problem.
( beeping and conversing
continuing )
MAN:
In the early days,
just having these children
survive was a miracle.
We referred to children
who made it on their own
as miracle babies.
And now miracles
are becoming more common.
In fact, it's more or less
an expectation
that a premature infant
will live.
Then we've discovered
that that may not be enough.
We've got to go a step further
and ask ourselves,
"Despite our very best efforts
medically, they aren't...
quite comparable
to full-term infants.
Why?
NARRATOR:
Does premature birth
shape the brain
in ways that nature
never intended?
For the next eight years,
Elizabeth will be part
of an unprecedented study.
EEGs will record her brain's
electrical impulses.
Magnetic-resonance images reveal
her brain's hidden structures.
( quietly ):
Yeah, it's bright in here
for you, I know.
We may be able
to do something about that.
NARRATOR:
Elizabeth doesn't know it yet,
but Heideleise Als has now
become part of her life.
ALS:
The brain is faced
with more challenges
than the brain
would be faced in the womb.
( quietly ):
Yes, you like
to be upright, yes.
ALS:
In the womb, she doesn't get
food directly into her stomach.
She gets food via the digestive
system of the mother.
And she isn't lying in a bed.
She has all that support.
And she doesn't have
to breathe on her own.
The mother's whole body
takes care of it.
The pre-terms can see...
they hear,
yet they can't manage themselves
in the same way
that a full-term child does.
( quietly ):
And if I move you
a little bit
you won't like that
so much.
ALS:
They will be much more
hypersensitive
more easily overstimulated.
Few impressions
can be managed easily.
They all go in and flood, yeah.
So you have these
big overreactive responses
that cost the baby tremendously.
So then you say, "Well,
can I do something about it?"
WOMAN ( quietly ):
I think I can't really see
where you are.
How you doing there?
I can't see her face,
can you see her face?
Mm-hmm, she looks okay.
All right
Her nose isn't
covered up or
anything, so...
There, make you
warm again, okay?
NARRATOR:
Als has demonstrated that a
carefully controlled environment
tuned to a premie's
special needs
will help them better manage the
world around them as they grow.
Elizabeth has spent
her short life
in an intensive care unit
specially designed by Als.
MOTHER:
Everything is gentle and slow,
trying to be quiet
with the baby...
( squealing )
( mother shushing quietly )
Trying to emulate the womb
where she would hear muffled
sounds, and it'd be dark.
And then,
the skin-to-skin contact.
She can hear my heart.
And that she's close to me,
and, and it's nice
because she does...
does seem to recognize me.
She settles down and finds
her spot and settles in,
and, and that's a great feeling.
When you're leaving her care
up to people
who are much more qualified
for most of her daily life,
it's nice to know
that she knows who mom is.
( Elizabeth fusses briefly )
Okay...
ALS:
The mother or father
can do so much better
in helping her be relaxed.
( quietly ):
Okay, got your fingers now,
good girl.
ALS:
The mother has the baby
on the breast.
That's what the brain, that's
what the body of the baby--
the nervous system-- has been
promised: the womb, the breast,
the closeness of holding,
the body of the parent,
and the family, the social group
that makes
that family feel confident.
Somebody's got
to open up the car.
I will.
NARRATOR:
Elizabeth was strong enough
to go home
when she was six weeks old.
Now, it's up to her parents
to continue the gentle care
begun in the hospital.
( Elizabeth fussing quietly )
( quietly ):
All right,
it's all right...
( quietly shushing )
Welcome home.
( continuing to shush )
NARRATOR:
She'll be going back
to see Dr. Als in two months...
Just after she was supposed
to have been born.
Als wants to compare
Elizabeth's brain
to the brains
of other premature babies,
premies who spent
the first days of their lives
in a standard hospital
intensive care unit.
Will the special treatment
Elizabeth received
make a difference?
How much influence
does the world around us have
on the developing brain?
To help answer that question,
neuroscientists turned
to a small animal
immortalized in a portrait
by Leonardo Da Vinci
over 500 years ago...
the ferret.
MAN:
The most fundamental question
in understanding
how the brain develops
has to be the interaction
between nature and nurture.
We know that
the brain has different areas
that do different things,
such as the visual cortex
at the back of the brain...
or the auditory cortex
in the middle of the brain.
How do these areas
get to be where they are
and how do they do what
they end up doing in the adult?
NARRATOR:
How plastic is the brain,
how flexible?
Can nurture trump
what nature intended?
In a series
of elegant experiments,
neuroscientist Mriganka Sur
restructured the brains
of newborn ferrets.
In the normal ferret,
light striking the eye
creates electrical waves
that travel
to the visual cortex.
Sur rewired the ferret's brain,
hooking up the eyes
to the auditory cortex,
showering the hearing parts
of the brain
with electric waves
generated by the light.
SUR:
We reasoned that if we can make
visual inputs from the eye
go to the auditory cortex
that normally processes hearing,
would the hearing cortex
now become like a visual cortex
or a seeing cortex
if it grew up with vision
rather than with audition?
Would the hearing cortex
now come to have
the same circuits
and connections
that mark the visual cortex?
If it doesn't, then nature,
or the genetic endowment,
is of the essence.
If it does, then
the inputs are important,
or nurture is important,
and the animal would see.
NARRATOR:
By recording a series of images
directly from the brains
of his rewired ferrets,
Sur provided evidence
that the ferrets could see.
With normal ferrets,
the activity of the neurons
in the visual cortex
takes on a characteristic
pinwheel shape.
With the rewired ferrets,
the auditory cortex describes
a similar pinwheel design.
The brain has been transformed,
but not entirely.
SUR:
Instead of 20/20 vision,
they will have, let's say,
20/60 vision,
meaning that they see at 20 feet
what a normal ferret
would see at 60 feet.
NARRATOR:
The characteristic pinwheel
is still there
but it is less orderly.
Slurred.
Environment shapes the brain
but can't completely change
genetic destiny.
SUR:
Our experiments demonstrate
beautifully, I think,
the interaction of nature
and nurture.
I believe that the environment
writes on a developing brain
but does not write
on a blank slate.
There is a structure
that comes about due to genes
which then is influenced further
by the environment
that the brain is developing in.
Our experiments provide
very clear evidence
of the remarkable plasticity
of the brain.
NARRATOR:
Three weeks after the day she
was supposed to have been born,
Elizabeth's parents brought
her back to see Heidelise Als
at Children's Hospital
in Boston.
Does the brain's
remarkable plasticity
make preemies like Elizabeth
especially vulnerable?
Does an intensive care unit
that mimics the womb
have a demonstrable effect
on the brain?
( beads rattling )
NARRATOR:
Once again, Als observed
Elizabeth carefully.
( cooing )
ALS:
How are you doing,
Elizabeth?
Hi, beautiful girl?
Did we wake you up
out of your sleep?
( chimes ringing )
( cooing )
That was great.
( chimes ringing )
ALS:
The toy really captured
her attention.
( chimes ringing )
And she just brightened
right up to it
and had her eyebrows up
and her eyes curious
and her face shaped forward
and she followed very smoothly
in all directions
and up and to the side
and in the full arc.
So that's wonderful
for just about three weeks
after due date
and she did very nicely
with the light
so although
that kept coming,
she shut it out
with just a little bit
of breathing adjustment
on her part.
Uh, in terms
of her strength
and all her
reflex repertoire,
she's symmetrical,
she's strong
and she came
to alertness.
I mean, she's really
come together.
That's very impressive,
yeah.
So overall, you've done
a remarkable job
in supporting her,
yeah.
It's not trivial,
a little baby, yeah.
NARRATOR:
Elizabeth appeared
to be doing well.
But she was enlisted
in another round of tests
to learn if her behavior
corresponded
to measurable changes
in her brain.
DUFFY:
No one has really
done this before.
It's only been recently
that we've had the experience
to say, "Is it possible
"that our intervention
may actually be visible
"in terms of a change
in physical development
of brain parameters?"
Can we actually see it
in the brain?"
NARRATOR:
It's still too early
to draw conclusions.
But we do know something
about Elizabeth.
Pictures from the MRI
reveal normal brain maturation.
And as for the results
of her EEG:
DUFFY:
Oh, she's surpassed.
Caught up, and surpassed
what I would expect.
It's a very nice, normal,
exemplary full-term EEG
that I could put in a textbook
as an example.
"To what can we attribute this?"
This will be the result
of our study.
As scientists, we have
to be very cautious
not to overinterpret
individual cases.
Uh, it's entirely possible
that her improvement
was through her own
internal fortitude
and that we were bit players
in this... in this great game
of growing up.
On the other hand,
we might have been very crucial.
And we'll never know, because
we can't wind the clock back
and not do the intervention
on her.
So what we have to do
is have a population
where there is no intervention,
population with an intervention
and compare them as a group.
There will always be a star
in the nonintervened group
who comes through well,
and there will always be someone
that we...
we just couldn't help, uh,
but on the average
is what we're looking for
and that's what the scientific
method is all about.
Elizabeth.
NARRATOR:
Whatever the reason, Elizabeth
is improving every day.
Hi...
How's my girl?
NARRATOR:
And for her parents,
that's enough.
MOTHER:
There's a great possibility
for Elizabeth to have, uh,
normal brain development.
( cooing )
And that's just such
a huge gift.
My hope when she was born was
that by the time she reached
kindergarten age, people...
she would just blend in
with her class, um,
but there seems to be
a very good chance
that on her first birthday,
she will be starting
to toddle
like any other
one-year-old
and that...
that would be great.
NARRATOR:
Premature or full-term,
every baby is faced
with the same challenge.
( baby cooing )
Awash in novel sights
and sounds,
babies must begin to learn
how to navigate
a roiling sea of sensations.
WOMAN:
There's a huge task
in organizing the world
that must be difficult,
but the babies seem to do it.
They act like little scientists.
They actively explore and
construct a view of the world
and in that sense,
they are parallel
to what we as scientists, uh,
do our entire lives
and what, uh, all of us do
as we try to negotiate
a very complicated world
that's constantly under change.
NARRATOR:
Babies are
exquisitely sensitive.
A newborn can identify
his mother's whispered coos,
respond to the fragrance
of her body
and the sweet taste
of her milk...
Even recognize her face.
WOMAN:
When you're holding your baby
and rocking him in your arms
and peering down at him,
your face happens
to be the distance
that babies like
to look at most of all.
And in fact,
even by two days of age,
a newborn baby can recognize
his mother from sight alone.
Now, that's quite
a remarkable ability
for a baby that has
a poorly developed eye
and for a baby that has
a poorly developed brain.
( cooing )
NARRATOR:
Vision is the last
of the senses to develop.
( cooing )
With an immature eye
sending wobbly signals
to a still developing brain,
it's no surprise
that a baby looks out on
a different world than an adult.
LEWIS:
What the baby is seeing then,
we think looks something
like a faded photograph.
If you take a photograph
and sort of fade it out
so that it's all washed out
and if you're looking at the
faded photograph through a tube,
then that is what
the world would look like
to a newborn baby.
The fact that the baby
doesn't see very well
in a sense is very good
for an immature brain
and that's because
this immature brain
cannot handle
excess stimulation.
So what the eye is doing
is dampening down
that external stimulation,
making it something that the
brain can handle much better.
But it's also important
to remember
that no matter how dampened down
that stimulation is
that's going into
this very immature brain,
that stimulation is critical.
NARRATOR:
What happens
if the brain doesn't get
the stimulation it needs?
What if light falls
upon the eye
but never reaches
its destination?
Holly McMillan
is just five weeks old.
A healthy, normal baby.
But her right eye
is clouded by a faulty lens--
a cataract
that must be removed at once
or she will never see
like a normal child.
WOMAN:
On the day that she was born,
we noticed that her eye--
her right eye--
didn't open as wide
as, uh, her left eye.
But in my family,
I have a sister and my father
that have an eye
that's a little bit--
just a little bit smaller
than the other, so we didn't
really think anything of it.
But we were informed
that we would have to have
surgery to remove the lens.
From what we hear, the sooner
the better for the surgery,
so hopefully it's soon enough.
Basically this is...
after all our discussions
that we had before,
this is the final form
that just gives
me permission
to go ahead
and do the right eye,
all right?
Mm-hmm.
That way
I won't forget.
MAN:
For a baby, it's really urgent
that we get in there
because if a baby
has a cataract, uh,
the images that are supposed
to be getting in--
those images which are critical
for the brain to be able
to develop its vision--
uh, those images
aren't getting there
and as a result, the brain
is not getting the opportunity
to experience vision
and go through its normal
visual development
which allows it
to eventually create
the healthy, normal vision
that we all know.
When Grandma has a cataract,
all of her connections
between eye and brain
have been formed years ago
and they remain stable
over time
so even if they're not used,
they don't go away.
But when your child
has a cataract,
it's the "use it or lose it"
game
that's being played
during development.
It's still a period
of decision-making
and pruning of connections.
In fact, even just one
or two months
of missing visual experience
from birth
can have permanent consequences
on the way that brain
is wired up and on what
that brain can do later on.
She'll do fine.
Okay, cutie pie.
Thank you.
All right, you'll see
her soon, okay?
Okay, thanks.
We'll take good care
of her.
( monitors beeping )
LEVIN:
Okay, so there's the cataract
right there inside the eye.
( monitors beeping )
I've just got a little bit
of a piece left here
that I need to get rid of.
Thank you.
She's still
sound asleep.
MOTHER:
Oh, what
a sweetie.
Now we're just going
to slip this in.
In the old days,
we used to do this under
general anesthesia,
but the nice thing
about this lens
is it allows us
to do it this way.
NARRATOR:
Within a week of the operation,
Holly's eye has healed
and Dr. Levin inserts
a contact lens
which Holly will need
for the rest of her life.
For the first time,
Holly's right eye is sending
clear images to her brain.
The key is if you just put
your hand right underneath
so you can feel the eyeball
underneath, you'll be fine.
All of a sudden it's as if
the eye was open to the brain.
It's the same
as if the baby came out
of that dark, jet-black womb
and all of a sudden
opened their eyes
in a delivery room somewhere.
NARRATOR:
But Holly's vision
is still in danger.
For at least five years,
until her visual development
stabilizes,
she will have to wear a patch
for most of her waking hours
over her good left eye,
or else her brain
will never learn
to use the right eye to see.
LEWIS:
If the good eye was not patched,
there is no point
in having the surgery at all.
There's no point
in having the contact lens.
You have this weak eye
that has to fight
for cortical connections
with a totally normal,
strong, good eye.
And that totally normal,
strong, good eye, if allowed,
will take over
all the brain space,
leave nothing
for the deprived eye,
and the deprived eye
will get weaker and weaker.
Sounds a little
counterintuitive.
Patching the good eye
should cause the same problem
that the cataract did.
But, in fact, it doesn't,
and we really don't understand
why that is.
And you can patch
that good eye intensely
and virtually never see
any adverse effect of that.
That's one of our mysteries.
LEWIS:
Now, Daddy, if you'll
just shut your eyes
as I show you
each one of these cards.
NARRATOR:
Holly's cataract
has been removed.
( whistles )
NARRATOR:
But how well can Holly see?
Okay, we got
one beautiful look
over there.
NARRATOR:
Just minutes after Holly
receives her contact lens,
psychologist Terri Lewis
examines her vision
by watching whether a finely
calibrated series of patterns
captures her attention.
You can't
play the game with
your eyes closed.
No, you can't.
LEWIS:
We find that even
within ten minutes
of first being able to see...
( whistles )
the baby can see
as well as a normal newborn.
That tells us that the brain
can mature up to some point
without any visual experience--
up to the newborn levels,
because certainly,
there's no visual experience
while the baby's in utero.
NARRATOR:
Although cataract babies
like Holly
see as well as newborn babies,
they don't see as well
as babies their own age.
( whistles ):
Here we go, Holly.
NARRATOR:
But they catch up quickly.
LEWIS:
It's shocking
how quickly vision improves
after that contact lens
is put in.
We found that within one hour,
we have
a significant improvement
in how well the babies can see.
Now, why this is so exciting is
because it tells us
that although the brain
is no better
than that of a normal newborn
in the absence
of visual experience,
once it gets
that visual experience,
it's ready to go.
It's champing at the bit,
because that first little bit,
even that first hour
of visual experience,
is going to send
that brain into action faster
than it would
in normal development.
NARRATOR:
In a series of carefully
controlled studies
comparing normal babies
to cataract babies,
Lewis has found that,
as cataract babies grow,
their vision continues
to improve
until they reach
their first birthday.
LEWIS:
The children do begin
falling behind after a year,
but, on average,
with early treatment
and complying
with doctor's instructions,
the eye can end up being
a totally good, functioning eye.
( giggles )
NARRATOR:
It has been seven months
since Holly's surgery,
and her parents have been
diligently patching
her good eye.
( Holly cooing )
LEWIS:
Let's see how you're
doing this time.
( whistles )
Holly.
Here we go.
( blows
through lips )
Are you ready?
Looking at me.
That's a good girl.
That was a nice
good look for me.
NARRATOR:
Holly's vision is improving.
Her cataract was removed early,
in time for her developing brain
to learn to see.
The visual tapestry of the world
will be fully hers
for the rest of her life.
( whistles and
clicks tongue )
Oh, good girl.
Yes! That was really
good looking.
( cooing )
NARRATOR:
When we are babies,
our brains are more open
to the shaping hand
of experience
than any time in our lives.
In response to the demands
of the world,
the baby's brain sculpts itself.
( giggling )
MCCONNELL:
I think the brain of a baby
is like a work in progress.
We're not really building
circuits from scratch anymore.
But now a baby's experience
with the environment
can refine the circuit
and influence which connections
are stabilized
and which connections are lost.
SHATZ:
We really think of brain
development as a continuum.
Although large sections
of wiring are permanent,
development doesn't stop.
It's not over-- it keeps on
going as we grow older.
It doesn't ever stop,
and, in fact,
at the end of this program,
your brain is going
to be different
from the way it was
in the beginning,
because you've learned something
and remembered something,
hopefully,
or you've forgotten.
But whatever you've done,
it's different
from the way it was before.
NARRATOR:
Our brains are plastic.
As babies grow and develop,
their brains adapt to the world
with a flexibility
that is the hallmark
of being human.
SHATZ:
There's great mystery left.
Our memories and our hopes
and our aspirations
and who we love, and all of that
is in there,
encoded in the circuits.
And we only have the barest
beginnings of an understanding
about how all of these things
really work.
NARRATOR:
The brain is just
the weight of God,
For heft them, pound for pound,
And they will differ,
if they do,
As syllable from sound.
( coos )
Join us
for the next four episodes
of The Secret Life
of the Brain,
and follow the brain's
remarkable journey
through a lifetime.
WOMAN:
Childhood can be
one of the most wonderful
periods of all of life
because we have everything
to discover.
The child's brain
and the miracle of language.
Ooh, bubbles.
How does a child learn to talk?
Hello, it's me, Rachel.
WOMAN:
How about this one?
And to read?
( all murmuring )
What happens
if something goes wrong?
BOY:
I had this, um,
this thing in my brain
that's called dyslexia.
[music] We clap our hands
in the sanctuary. [music]
[music] We clap our hands. [music]
MAN:
Adolescence
is the last great time
of enormous brain change
and brain development.
[music] Jesus! [music]
The teenage brain is vulnerable
to the dangers of drugs.
I'm an addict.
And I need, I need help.
[music] And we will praise Him
for the rest of our days. [music]
And the chaos of schizophrenia.
MAN:
I spent 19 years
with the same personality
and, all of a sudden,
it was taken away.
[music] And we will praise Him
for the rest of our days. [music]
( horn honking )
( brakes squealing )
( cars crash )
( sirens blaring )
MAN:
We are not thinking machines.
We are feeling machines
that think.
The adult brain,
a fragile balance
between thinking and feeling.
MAN:
Why do we have these emotions?
What are they for?
WOMAN:
There's no empathy or sympathy.
He just can't get that feeling.
WOMAN:
Deadness, terror,
distorted time.
I did not want to live.
WOMAN:
One weekend,
our daughter was here
and he walked into the kitchen,
and he said, "Who are you?"
In its final decades,
the brain is faced
with a new set of challenges.
MAN:
63 years old
and can't tie your own shoes.
Isn't that ridiculous?
But it marshals
surprising powers of renewal.
MAN:
"What makes the engine go?
"Desire.
Desire."
Take a 3-D animated tour
of the brain
at PBS Online.
Find brain teasers,
take a cognitive test and more
at pbs.org.